[Music]
Well, thank you all and thank you all
very much for your wonderful talks this
morning. I was absolutely uh well, they
were just brilliant talks and I always
enjoy hearing you all speak. So, thank
you all very much for that. Um, for the
purposes of this panel discussion, we
might be covering a couple of the key
concepts that were already covered
during the talks, but because this will
be a discrete
video that will be available, we might
might go over a couple things as well.
First of all, we just wanted to to cover
and establish what the metabolic theory
metabolic theory of cancer is. if you
wanted to give a brief discussion on
that and what the evidence is that this
is more of a mitochondrial issue than a
genetic issue.
>> I think the data speaks for them speak
for themselves. Um,
as Matt as Matt said, it's a mitoric
problem. And I think because we weren't
able to see mitochondria for so many
years until the electron micros
microscope, a lot of what we knew about
mitochondria came from biochemistry.
Uh, Warberg never saw a mitochondria. He
called them granite. They were some
thing in the cytoplasm that made energy,
but he didn't look at it. All of his
concepts were based on biochemistry.
Um, but only after you started looking
at these things in in a greater way. And
I agree with Matt, the future is
mitochondrientric
because it's underlies all the chronic
diseases, all major cancers because that
organel has been corrupted by our new
diet and lifestyles putting us at risk.
So we can still fumble and bumble around
with the, you know, gene centric kind of
thing or we can, you know, begin to
realize that this is a a new way of
looking at disease. And I think you're
going to see the outcomes change
dramatically. And I think what we all we
all agree we're all agree on the same
page. There's no discrepancies here.
>> Yeah.
So we we discussed in in in your talks
some of the treatment aspects for
someone who has active cancer, but will
these same principles also apply to
prevention.
You can't it's hard to get cancer with
your mitochondria healthy. Uh it's very
hard.
>> Um and people say, "Oh, look at all the
people with can." You have to really
abuse the hell out of your body to get
cancer. People say, "I didn't really do
that much." Well, from what we heard,
we're just living in an in a provocative
environment. When you take animals that
don't have cancer and try to give them
cancer, it's very hard. So, so whatever
we're doing in our environment, the
great diet and lifestyle, we're abusing
our bodies. And more and more cancer are
coming to younger and younger people. We
got obesity epidemics, diabetes
epidemics, all these epidemics all all
impacting for decades. It doesn't like
one day you're healthy, next day you
wake up with a tumor. These are chronic
problems manifesting themselves in very
different ways. So, so yes, if you keep
your mitochondria healthy, if you have a
GKI low, if we if if we did what
Isabella says, um I would be we would
probably be be like the Paleolithic
guys, right?
I said we put on animal skins and we
have a good time, right?
Yeah, one of the concepts uh that's
really important which I didn't talk
about because it was for people with
cancer but for prevention uh this
concept of hormesis is is crucial uh and
uh hormesis means you apply a stress to
your the cells or your body or whatever
intermittently and then give them a nice
recovery and if you do that uh things
get stronger over time. Now taking that
further mitommesis
means uh adopting this concept in a
mitoric manner. So things like uh you do
u u a nice exercise program for example
when you exercise it's actually a stress
that damages mitochondria and they
recover and get stronger in the interim.
I think if you do that, you'll keep your
mitochondria healthy long term. And if
if you've got that mito shift where the
mitochondria healthy and doing most of
the metabolism and controlling the cell
functions and u you got some nice mito
recovery going on and you know they're
getting enhanced. I see I think it would
be very difficult to get the vast
majority of cancers um you know I won't
say all because I'm not a purist but I
think most of them you you it would it'd
be very hard to to get them.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. And I think I think to your point
to to the points that Isabella made in
her talk,
you one of the roles among the key roles
of of insulin while they have hundreds
of different mechanisms in you know in
your body, but it also suppresses
autophagy and mphagy importantly. And so
if we're getting damage to our
mitochondria and we're suppressing their
regeneration and uh the generation of
new mitochondria, then obviously that's
going to build up a toll on your
mitochondrial health over time. And so
if you're maintaining a ketogenic diet,
you're maintaining a low insulin level,
then you're actually going to be
triggering autophagy and mphagy, and
some studies have shown that after
several months, you'll have multiple uh
times more mitochondria in your cells,
and they're and they're much more
effective because they've been turned
over and recycled as well. So even from
a from a preventative mechanism, just
from that standpoint, keeping your
insulin low, that might be protective as
well.
So in my PhD studies you know which was
looking at aging and longevity
um the hormones the two biomarkers was
insulin and IGF-1 that had the strongest
influence on lifespan with health span
and that was in across species all of
life studies and so there goes if it's
lifespan with health span the odds are
cancer will go down the risk for it
So,
uh, Professor Seafrey touched on this a
couple points as well, but what would be
some of the mainstream
sort of, um, challenges to this theory
of, um, the metabolic theory of cancer?
>> Lack of knowledge.
>> Good. All right.
[Applause]
So obviously you know this is called
ketogenic metabolic therapy. So so the
main focus is being in ketosis you know
u uh Matthew you you work with people
doing a carnivore to vegetarian sort of
approaches. I've certainly seen that in
the literature certain case series you
know specifically in GBM actually out of
Arizona they did a ketogenic uh approach
in a case series with 16 patients and
had um
you know had had significant um
shrinkage of the tumors and things like
that and they actually used a
plant-based ketogenic approach as well
which was interesting. So, is it is it
simply the the ketogenic side of this or
there other sort of dietary
modifications that are important in this
as well?
Oh, it's a good question. I mean,
evolutionarily,
um, if we go pre-cultural, it should be
meat-based, right? So, more carnivore
near the poles and as you get further
south, there's more plant-based. This is
pre-cultural when plants didn't look
like anything like they do today, right?
So um in terms of cancer treatment
though, yeah, if you maintain the
ketogenic state the and you're doing the
mito shift and the mito recover and all
that all that stuff and um if you're
making sure you work that vegetarian
diet correctly so you don't get nutrient
deficiencies. So when I get a vegetarian
or vegan patient, I always check a few
key things as you probably do. You know,
the zinc, the vitamin D and calcium and
and uh and so on. So, um, I I see no
reason why it wouldn't work, uh, as
effectively. Another thing people say
about the carnivore diet that they worry
about is, is it going to dump a whole
bunch of glutamine in my system, which
is other than glucose, right? You can
have substrate level phosphorilation
through glycolysis, but you can also
have it, Professor Seaffrey showed,
through glutaminolysis. And a lot of
people uh worry about this theoretical
uh concern and me too doing a level you
know if I have my tomahawk am I is the
GBM gonna crank up it's uh the gl you
know glutamine usage well I can tell you
on a you know theory is important but do
when you do clinical trials and you're
in the trenches with the patients it's
your your knowledge it's way different
kind of learning right so it hasn't been
an issue so I think a lot of the
theoretical issues against maybe
vegetarian keto or carnivore keto. When
you actually do this stuff, uh the body
probably is a lot of ways to to to
compensate and it's more, you know, more
complicated than one could imagine on
many levels. So anyways, uh yeah, I I
think the ketosis state to answer your
question is is the key the key thing.
Yeah. And all the other mechanisms that
come with that.
So um I'm in slight disagreement on that
and uh I think that it should be shifted
more to meat-based animal based rather
than plant-based and I think that there
are reasons for that and the degree of
the shift you could argue is different
for different types of cancers and
comorbidities as well. So it is easier
to be in a higher state of ketosis on a
carnivore diet. That's one thing that we
actually notice amongst participants and
patients that we work with. So it's
easier. You're already undergoing a very
stressful situation. You want the
easiest solution. That's number one.
It's also very nutrient sufficient. So
you don't even need to worry about
deficiencies. They will get corrected
more than likely on a carnivore diet.
It's highly bioavailable.
Plants, they have been used
traditionally as medicine and do
sometimes work as medicines. They act as
cleansers for the body. So they bind to
things and take them out through the
intestines. They will lower your
cholesterol. By the way of lowering your
cholesterol, the fiber of the plants as
well as many seed oils is by extracting
out the bile from your body. What is
bile for? To absorb vitamin A, D, K, E,
omega3, omega6, and essentially torine,
which is essential for your
mitochondrial function. is essential for
the tRNA transcription for the oxidative
phosphorilation machinery as an
antioxidant as well to your
mitochondria. It can only be absorbed
with bile. So you do not want to be
eating in a diet that extracts your bile
that inhibits its reabsorption. So that
attention to detail does matter. Fiber
can keep your stomach pH between 3.5 to
5.5.
That's going to keep your lower
esophageal sphincter more open. You're
going to have more gases, acid coming
up. That's going to activate your
sympathetic nervous system. That's going
to increase blood glucose as a stress
adrenaline response. So these things
have to be thought about especially with
patients who have any kind of acid
reflux who have any uh laryngal fangal
cough reflex things like that. So then
you've got patients who have rheumatoid
arthritis sensitivities. Um so they're
going to have to be more particular with
foods that are going to activate their
immune system in a disregulated way. And
with seed oils, you know, quite a lot of
them are phytoestrogen rich. Do you want
to do that when you've got a hormone
sensitive cancer?
So, you know, plant-based, I'm a little
more more negative on that for cancer
patients especially.
So
you
so this is something you mentioned as
well in your talk but is there an ideal
way of of achieving a low GKR? Can you
manipulate this with uh you know ketone
esters or MCT oils? I know that
professor um Seaf Freed had a
competition in his lab. They all went on
a ketogenic carnivore diet to see who
can get their GKI down lower. The guy
who won turned out to be cheating
because he was taking MCT oils. So, is
that is that legal when you're trying to
treat cancer? Is it is it is it that
combination of having higher ketones and
lower glucose by any hook or crook? Or
is it that you're really trying to limit
and suppress the glucose to have it not
available to the cancer cells and by
virtue of being in that state, you're
having higher ketones which support your
native cells.
>> I think all all of what you said is is
is part of the whole thing. The the
competition to who can get the lowest
GKI
athletes
cheat by taking steroids or some sort of
hormone, right?
So when you're in competition to see who
can get the lowest GKI, you cheat by
taking MCT oil, right? Then you'll win
the then you'll win the competition. Um
the higher the ketones also reduce the
absorption of glucose that that you're
going to do. So yes, and and um the the
idea is how low can you get your your
your GKI. Um
and but not to the point where you're
going to be so super obsessive about it.
Fasting is is clear. exercise massively
helpful if you're doing water fasting or
and exercise that'll bring your GKI
down. Um again, you're exercising your
mitochondria as well as the rest of your
body. But all of what you said, Anthony,
is all of this plays a role. But yes,
that's why we said like Domino loves to
take ketone supplements. I mean, he'll
always You want to have a race with Dom,
Dom will always win.
>> Okay. He eats squirrels as well and he
exercises. So, uh, so, so, uh, there's a
lot of ways to get to get there, but but
he's always very healthy. I don't ever
see Dom out of energy.
>> So, but what you said, I think you put
it all together and you can, but not how
low can you you can't get it too low
because you you you're you're really
going to harm your ariththraittes. So,
we were talking about how little gluc
just tiny amount of glucose that you
need for your ariththraittes. they don't
need much. But you can't go zero glucose
uh on this ever, I don't think.
>> Um so again, I I mentioned that earlier
in my in my talk, which was that um
exogenous ketones, they they will have
some benefit at at a time point in your
treatment. And but it's at the
beginning, you really want to know what
helps you get into therapeutic ketosis
without the exogenous ketones. You want
to know what are the key foods that work
for you. You want to figure out what are
the 10 things that you call going back
to basics so that if you're doing
treatment, you have a stressful event in
your life, any of these sorts of things,
you know what to go back to as the
basics that work for you. So you do that
without exogenous ketones because also
what does it mean? It means that you've
got your insulin low which means all
those growth factors have gone down too
which are all impacting the mitochondria
is stimulating the growth and
proliferation and inhibiting the
apoptosis. So it's really important to
not go straight to the exogenous ketones
and then once you know what are your
baseline core things that work for you
then you can experiment around with the
isogenous ketones.
The important issue when we say
endogenous ketones versus ketone
supplements um we have to be careful
because some of them are recemic
mixtures. They have DNL ketone in there.
It's the it's the uh L ketone,
right? That's the natural. So when you
take MCT oil, the oil goes your your
liver will make the natural ketone from
the MCT oil as opposed to taking
exogenous ketones. So we have to
recognize that. So you want to make
ketones from your liver.
>> The liver is the predominant organ that
makes natural ketones. If you put in
recemic mixtures, you can you don't get
the full power. Uh you don't there's a
delta G- prime ATP hydraysis that
ketones are what we call superfu for the
body. They have more carbon hydrogen
bonds than pyuvate and they do not
uncouple the mitochondria like fatty
acids. And therefore that's why the late
George Cahill and Budvich friends of
mine always were talking about the
bioenergetic power of the ketone and you
want it natural and that's what you
that's ultimately the go that's what our
ancestors they were always in natural
ketosis.
>> Yeah. Um so that that brings another
question to mind where you know we we do
see this pattern where people get this
this idea of being keto adapted fat
adapted where after several months 6
months or longer
their ketone levels naturally go down.
This is um typically thought to be
because they're being more adapted
utilizing these ketones more properly.
They're not expelling them in the urine
uh as readily as they were in the first
six months or so. So, does that change
the equation for the GKI? Because if
you're if if you're eating the exact
same amount at day one and eating in the
exact same patterns and descriptions and
then 6 months, 8 months, a year down the
track, you're just not able to maintain
a higher ketone level due to this
adaptation um phenomenon. Does that
change how we're trying to calculate the
GKI is or does that come into it?
>> I think that's a great question. Andrew
Scarboro has been doing the Where's
Andrew? Is he is he here? Oh, Andrew.
Okay. So, Andrew knows pretty much his
GKI without having to measure it because
he's been in these zones and he it does
rise over time, but the efficiency of
the the balance of the metabolism has
become so much more uh uh superior to
the way it was and the body makes these
adjustments. At the beginning, I think
we have to be very like what Matt was
saying, you have to be uh rigid on this
is with flexibility of course, but your
body will slowly adapt uh to this whole
new environment. Uh we don't call it
new, it's like return to who we were,
but but you um uh yeah, people people
can do well. Uh but it does change.
>> So I don't think we have to be
>> killing ourselves. Well, when you've
done it as long as Andrew, I mean
others, but there's some you're a group,
>> right? Right. They
>> longest is 20 years more.
>> 20 years. Did they How would you should
when how measuring your GKI for 20 years
would be really impressive, would it?
>> And uh I mean, you know, two of them
already had children and then
>> you know, two two had already had
children before the trial and then two
who planned to have children had them
immediately after the trial. So, you
know, that's a sign as well as healthy
function of the body, being able to
conceive children easily. Um, you know,
the sign that they've been sustaining it
for a long time and it obviously wasn't
messing up their natural physiology.
>> So, um, and we talked about glutamine as
well. Not really. I mean, glutamine is
is abundant in in plant and animal based
food sources. We make it ourselves. So
what is the significance of u taking
sort of you know pharmaceutical
suppression of uh glutamine? How
important of a role is that in in this
ketogenic metabolic therapy?
>> That to me is the key. Um
we can certainly manage cancer
effectively doing keto by itself,
but we're interested in seeing how far
we can push the body to get rid of it.
The problem with targeting glutamine
and that's why we had the press pulse
was
um when you kill cancer cells in the
tissue we have another army of cells
come in and pick up the dead cells the
corpses which are the macrofagages and
they clean up the micro environment but
they need glutamine just like the tumor
cells. So glutamine is essential for our
gut, essential for the immune cells and
essential for uh ura cycles and a
variety of other glutamine dependent um
activities. So when we try so we're at
that this this is why you this strategy
has to be very
our approach has to be strategic
because we don't want to be too
aggressive in targeting glutamine
because we'll paralyze our immune system
and damage our gut.
So we have to be cognizant of that and
that's where dosage timing and
scheduling for what Matt's doing. I
don't think you have to when you're
cancer patients for sure you have to
measure it but that's our challenge to
know that um how far can we push the
glutamine targeting without harming the
body. Dawn is the best drug that we have
found to do that and it's not available.
Why? I have no clue. Can't make any
money on that's the real reason. It's
off patent. They can't make you can't
They're making Dawn out of John's
Hopkins. They make they change the
molecule a little bit pat, but they
haven't let it out. They like to try
these drugs by themselves. You have to
do it as a package deal. So, so the
issue here is we have a drug. It's
exceptionally powerful, but it also has
ad capabilities to harm part of the
body. So strategies would be do dosing
it in certain ways to reduce its
toxicity but maintains its therapeutic
efficacy or find a way to keep that drug
powerful but neutralize it's a toxic
toxic thing part and that's where we are
right now. So but I think if we had
access to dime why don't we have access
to dime? I mean we used it on little
kids. We used it on a lot of cancer
patients. They said it didn't work and
it had little toxicity. nothing like Red
Devil, Declar Rubison, but they dropped
it because it it it wasn't done. If you
have a tool, you need to know how to use
the tool. You don't take an a hammer to
to to saw wood. You know what I'm
saying? So, so they were using a tool in
the wrong in the wrong way. Now, we know
how to use it, and we have an idea how
to make it better, but we don't have the
drug available to us. A
>> and that should not be
Are there
other other agents that clinicians could
could use um in instead of Dawn if to
get some similar sort of effect? Uh
yeah, we have CPI 613 which failed in
clinical trials um for pancreatic
cancer. Uh when we put it on the mice it
failed miserably as well but when we
administered it with fasting and
ketogenic diet powerful. So again, once
you put the patient in this state of
nutritional ketosis, it opens up a whole
array, a new array of drugs that may
have been uh thrown out, not worked.
That's called the whole field of
repurposing drugs. Now, but once the
body is in this new physiological state,
things that were thought to be
ineffective become super effective. So
again, that's an whole new field that
will open as the result once this
information gets out more. And you
mentioned a bendazol in your talk as
well. Does that have a glutamine
blocking aspect to it?
>> Yes, that's in our paper also. That's
another interesting thing. Parasite
medications. I don't know about
ivormectin because there was a lot of
political stuff about that. So I didn't
I said to the the lab we're not going to
do that because we didn't want to get
get the wrath from somebody. But but and
bendazol fen bendazol. Um I said why the
hell why people have taken that and they
and you hear people say well I got my
rid of my cancer with this and that. So
I I I did a dive on it and I said why
why parasite medications work against
cancer cells and it turns out that the
parasites use mitochondrial substrate
level phosphorilation in the tissue and
and these mendazol fenazol kill these
parasites. So I tried it on the cancer
cell and sure sure as hell they it it
targets the mitochondrial substrate and
glycolysis. So we have a mechanism now
why parasite medications are working but
cancer is not a parasite.
>> All these people say oh cancer is a
parasite. It's not a parasite. Parasites
and tumors use a common metabolic
pathway and a drug that works against
parasites can be very effective against
cancer. And that's what we begin to see
especially under nutritional ketosis.
>> Right? Can you imagine this?
>> Yeah. That Oh, sorry.
>> Um, so ivormectin actually works on the
mitochondrial cell death pathway, the
BCL2 backspad pathway. So, it actually
helps push the cell death pathway.
There's some quite good literature in
that actually. Um, and then with regards
to dawn and as you said, you know,
toxicity and why is it different
glutamine inhibition? Why is it
different whilst you're in ketosis? This
is something really important because of
course once you get a cancer diagnosis
and you come across the work that's been
done here a lot of people want to do
everything all at the same time and it's
important not to do that. You need to
get into therapeutic ketosis and it
needs to be sustain sustained for a
period of time. It's really important so
that all the programming of your muscles
your lean muscle mass goes into protein
preservation mode. And once you get that
then you know you do some fasting along
with some glutamine inhibition. And then
first of all with regards to the
intestines you know you don't want to be
eating whilst you're taking a drug
that's going to negatively affect your
intestines either. So um it is it is a
caution to people not to want to do it
all at the same time. It has to be
strategically planned out.
And then
OB, you know, I I know the the answer to
this question, but just just to to get
it on the record, you know, and and and
um illustrate what uh Dr. Phillips has
been doing. Um this isn't something that
is either or, is it? It's not something
you have to do instead of standard of
care. This is something you can do with
and could potentially provide
synergistic benefits. Is that correct?
>> Yeah, we all agree, I think, on that.
>> Yeah. just like that transcending
duality which is why you know I'm okay
with working with vegetarian or
carnivore or omnivore. I realize most
people are of carnivore bends in the
room. So but I am okay with that. I
don't think we should polarize.
Um
and uh theoretical reasons are not as
important as clinical reality.
So I I have a lot of misconceptions when
I was learning about this stuff for the
last few years. I thought, oh, what
about that? What about that?
What's fasting gonna do to the
microbiota? This this is this all falls
flat when you work with patients. And
that, you know, I respect GBM.
It's unpredictable. It's capricious. And
I respect my patients who embark on
these things. So, um, yeah, I think you
don't have to restrict yourself to one
way of thinking on many levels, and
that's super important not to don't
entrench.
>> Um, you know, we mentioned our friend
Andrew Scarro previously, a very
long-term survivor of uh, GBM and and
doing very well, which is great. So,
that's good for Andrew. Give it up for
Andrew.
when when he spoke here two years ago
when this meeting was up in Sheffield,
he he mentioned how uh dietitians and
nutritionists weren't really
understanding of keto ketogenic
metabolic therapy didn't really
understand thought could be dangerous
stress the system. Uh I know that the
BBC um got very upset um at Dr. Seaf
Freed's appearance on the diary with CEO
saying that that if you go into a
ketogenic diet, this could be harmful,
this could be damaging to your health
and things like that. Um, has there been
any ground gained with nutritionists and
dieticians? Um, and and how do we how do
we sort of make inroads with um with
them to to try to help facilitate uh
these changes in cancer?
>> I can speak from a clinical reality
perspective. Um, so on this GBM trial,
there is no dietician.
>> There's no dietitian in the country of
New Zealand who's qualified to do the
fasting protocol. And what we're doing
is essentially a heavy duty fasting
protocol. It's uh very few that are
qualified to administer a ketogenic
diet, let alone a carnivore diet or a
vegetarian diet, you know, vonavore. But
even then um yeah there's they're so far
removed uh as a practice from as a as a
as a field from the real world imple
implementation of these things. Where do
you start? I mean I find the dieticians
are the most uh and the high level
specialists are the most challenging two
groups to to change. So I I think you
just have to do it yourself and um you
know if I had there's a few dietitians
in the states uh and probably the UK
that are probably able to do this but in
little New Zealand no. So yeah I think
when you don't have the people around
you that you need to help you you just
have to do it yourself and skill up
yourself and go for it. Yeah that's my
take.
Yeah, that is a challenge. But we we
we're learning. Many of these dieticians
are starting to learn and they want to
become involved in this and they start
learning how to power food to help to
help this and get this. Alicia Helis out
of Minneapolis, Minnesota has a clinic
and she um studied in her she's a
physician's assistant actually, but she
she's got as much dietary experience in
doing all this kind of stuff as well.
Yeah. I I it just takes time for people
to learn how to how to do this. If you
have a license, they have to re
re-evaluate um what it means to be in
ketosis. They have to be balanced in
micro and macronutrients. Do it do do it
the way Isabella says. Um learn learn
from those experiences and then apply
that uh and start uh doing this.
I don't know what's going on. You go to
the hospital and and the cancer center
and and they're eating they're drinking
Coca-Cola, sweet tea and and donuts
and I saw the guy with the being infused
with Red Devil DX Dr. Rubison with a
stand with the bag
and he's got a a liter of Coca-Cola
>> and a and a and a hamburger.
>> And I'm saying to him, I said, "What the
hell is this?" in the in the leading
cancer center of our country, Dana
Farmer Cancer Center,
>> right? But then I found out it happens
in MD Anderson Sloan Gatering. Go right
down the list. I mean, this is nuts,
right? And where's the dietician there?
She should be ripping the the soda out
of his hand, right?
>> Rather than tell me, here's another one.
>> Put that on top of it, actually. Um
I mean, it's not anecdotal. I've seen
this too many times and it drives me
nuts following on from what you're
saying. So patients who, you know,
really they contact us really desperate
because they've been sent to hospice at
this point, which means they've been
sent to die and they're told there's
nothing we can do for you. They've often
been completely destroyed by the
standard of care at this point. And
they're told, you know, go home, well,
go to theospice and spend as much time
with your family. And then, you know,
the the family that they're struggling
to eat, struggling to get any nutrition.
So, well, why not try, you know, total
parental nutrition, a ketogenic version.
They're not ideal. They're not perfect.
There's a lot of bad ingredients in
them, but at least.
And when we spoke to dieticians at Great
Ormond and the doctors who do prescribe
this for childhood epilepsy, their
answer is, "Oh, no, it's too dangerous."
I mean, seriously,
it is absolutely shocking. What about
the quality of life? Even in your end of
life, every day matters and every day is
worth fighting for.
[Music]
Yeah. I I I don't know how many patients
have come to me after speaking with
their oncologist and they say, "Is there
anything I can do? Should I stop
drinking? Should I change my diet this
and the other?" And they say, "No, don't
worry about it. Eat and drink whatever
you want. It doesn't matter." and and to
them I I think to the oncologists
they're trying to just give them a free
pass. Look, go and enjoy your life.
You've got a you terminal glyobblasto.
Um just, you know, it's not going to
it's not going to be a problem. And
giving them permission to go and enjoy
themselves. But to the patient, every
single time they said this, their head
goes down. They said, "Yeah, I guess
there's nothing there's nothing I can
do." And because they're actually
asking, they're trying to be proactive
in their in their treatment. They what
can I do? How can I help? Is there
anything I can do? and they say, "No,
absolutely not." And it crushes their
spirit. I see it every time. And I
always tell them, "Of course it makes a
difference. Of course, it matters what
you do." I mean, even beyond all the
principles that we spoke about today,
just being healthier is going to help
you weather the storm of chemo,
radiation, and surgery. So, just that
alone, just just being healthier
generally is going to help you get
through this. So, and obviously I I I
fully in agreement with all of you that
this is this is something very
significant and should be a significant
part of of cancer treatments as well,
but at the very least,
you know, just understanding that just
being healthy generally is going to
improve your outcome and your treatment
as well. Um, so yeah, so thank you very
much for that. Um, you know, one one
question from from a practical
standpoint. If someone doesn't have a
clinician or a doctor that is supportive
of this or wants to put them on a
ketogenic diet, obviously you can't do
the medications yourself. You should
never take these sort of supplements or
medications uh on your own without
without medical supervision. However,
what about just the diet side of things?
Is there any issue that you see with
people just saying, "Okay, well, look,
I'm just going to" and again, the
oncologist said, "Doesn't matter what
you eat or drink, okay? So why not be a
ketogenic diet, right? And um so is is
there any issue um from anybody here's
standpoint if someone's just saying,
"Hey, look, I'm going to enact a
ketogenic diet myself to try to help my
my treatment."
[Music]
I I see one of the things about
ketogenic metabolic therapy
is that a significant burden of success
will fall on the shoulders of the
patient themselves.
Every every success the greatest
successes we have had is when the
patient understands the concepts what
they need to do and how to do it and the
family of the patient is understanding
of that. Those are the people that we
really see the best. So, and they you'd
be surprised how fast I teach in uh
undergraduates and graduate students in
these biochemical things and all that
stuff and you know they struggle to
learn this and they they don't you know
you get somebody with a gle you'd be
surprised how smart they get in such a
short period of time. They're in those
books they know more than those kids do.
They're out there learn they're kids are
memorizing it to get into medical school
right these people are looking at it to
survive. There's a totally different uh
view with the motivated person. You get
a good knowledgeable u metabolic
oncologist, a good dietician and a
motivated patient, you're going to get
tremendous success on these things. But
unfortunately, we have all these
discrepancies right now.
Okay. All right. So, we're going to open
up questions. Um and we're going to go
back and forth. So, we're going to have
to keep the questions very very brief
and um unfortunately we don't have time
to to have a have a a large setup for
the questions. You have about 20 seconds
to get your question out and then there
needs to be a question because we want
to get to as many as we can because we
already have a a lineup. So, we'll start
over here.
>> Um I know somebody who's 61 years old
and has had stage 4
cancer for 2 years. Is it too late to
try it?
[Music]
It's never too late to try. It's never
too late to fight.
[Music]
>> Yeah. I mean, you know, they're still
here, so there's obviously worth
definitely worth trying. And so, you
know, the the sooner the better for
sure.
We'll go to this side. I'm going to try
and get in two questions in 20 seconds.
And the first one is, what about
post-menopausal thyroid women? Um,
hypothyroid women, they find ketogenic
diets quite difficult. Question number
one. Question number two, fluconazole in
GBM seems to shrink tumors. And I
wondered if there was anything in the
literature. Um, and third point,
linoleic acid cardipin maintaining
mitochondrial help uh health.
>> That's it.
>> Okay. So um post-menopausal woman and
thyroid I have met many post-menopausal
women who are drinking kale, spinach,
almond milk and flax seed shakes which
are really not good for your thyroid.
You know spinach and kale constantly
advertise as the superfood. Um so this
combination there's been more damage,
there's been more harm. So there's a lot
more time hard work involved and um it
usually comes with hypocchloryria which
is something that I haven't actually met
someone with metabolic disregulation
that doesn't actually have a form of
hypogchlory that has to be addressed in
actual fact with I'll I'll go to the
linenic acid and then I'll pass the mic
over. the the omega6,
you should actually have a good amount
of it in your mitochondrial membrane in
actual fact. Um, where you don't see it
in your red blood cells because they
your mature red blood cells don't have
mitochondria,
it's not necessarily because we're not
eating it. It's because we're using it
up. The inflammatory state draws the
omega6 out of the membrane, turns it
into prostaglandins to send these
inflammatory signals. So we have to
consider when we look at anything, it's
not necessarily how much we're putting
in as well. It's how much we're using
out. So it's going to be a balance of
that equation. So what we don't want to
be doing is triggering the inflammation
that is then removing that omega6 from
where it's supposed to be. And we're
only supposed to use it for acute
inflammation instances which we, you
know, we would have environ you know
evolutionary would have been
experiencing it at times. but not
chronically drawing it out. And when you
chronically draw it out, hyperinsmia
will do this. It will reduce the omega-6
that's in your mitochondria. That then
harms your cardipin.
Yeah. Well, cardioipin is we're big fans
of that because we isolated and purified
cardio. We we characterized the entire
mitochondrial that cardipin profile in
in brain in mouse brain and then we did
it in human brain and we did it in
cancer. uh it gets blown to hell in
cancer. So um I mean it's just
unrecognizable any longer and it has a
it has a pattern that you would see in a
cell that would be fermenting. So
clearly we got to keep the the cardipin
is it's a it's the key.
I I don't have time to go into the
evolutionary biology of cardipin but
it's unbelievable if I I can talk to you
later about it because there's a big
story about that. We and we we did a lot
of it for years. It's not easy. We did
we characterize the the the the lipidome
of mitochondria in in brain and what
happens to it in in in cancer. So it's
just that I don't know how many people
would really want to know about that at
this time. Oh you okay well I'll tell
you all about it.
>> Okay. We'll go to this side.
>> Fluconazol. Sorry.
>> Oh flu Oh. Is anybody have an opinion on
fluconazol for treatment uh in cancer?
>> What? Say again.
>> Fluconazol. Have you?
>> Oh, fluconazol.
Yeah, I don't know anything about that.
>> We've had a case of a lady on um a
ketogenic diet for three, four years,
was doing well, but the tumor never
shrunk and then she had very high um
fungal markers and fluconosol is the
only ail that actually penetrates the
bloodb brain barrier really well. You
can get really good levels of it in the
brain. And that's when after her fifth
or sixth um annual CT scan for the first
time the tumor started shrinking.
>> Yeah. Yeah. So just I wondered if there
was anything
>> I don't know but you know when we one of
the things that we found that um you
know do you know there's a huge effort
to try to find drugs to penetrate the
bloodb brain barrier right
big field right we took small molecules
for ta I worked on tay-ax disease a
lipid storage disease and we found and
with brain cancer when the when the
animal is in and I'm sure a human as
well in therapeutic ketosis small
molecules ules are effectively delivered
through the bloodb brain barrier without
toxicity. So why do we have to spend a
billion dollars to find a drug when a
ketogenic diet or nutritional ketosis
can penetrate and different structures
of small molecules? Unbelievable. So I I
don't understand. Don't they read our
paper? You you can get all this stuff uh
done far far more efficiently with
minimal cost.
I don't know. I'm ready to give up on
that.
Sorry.
>> Yeah.
>> Well, they have um that's what they're
saying now, too. People use
antiparasitics and it helps the cancer
treatment. So, they're saying cancer
must be a parasite even though we really
haven't we don't see parasites and
cancer cells. We look at them under
electron microscopes. I mean, that's not
what we're seeing. But, um but then the
other the other one is
>> there's one more.
>> You see parasites in cancer patients.
>> Yeah.
>> That's a different thing. Yeah.
>> Right.
>> Yeah. And then and then uh but then the
other one is um cancers are fungal
infections. So maybe that's what it is.
You just cured the fungal infection.
That's not true obviously, but it's but
that's the rumor. The a lot of these
drugs that get repurposed um and and
then have you know a
benefit with cancer treatment. Then
people will say well this was normally a
a fungal treatment so it must be a
fungus. Cancer must be a fungus or a
parasite or something like that. But um
yeah, obviously an awesome see that. Um
okay, we'll go this side.
>> Hello. Thank you. My name is Anita. I'm
a GP that works with prostate and breast
cancer patients. Um my question is
besides having a ketogenic diet,
intermittent fasting, are there any
other things in the diet or that they
can do to optimize their health, whether
it's specific food groups, specific um
kind of supplements that you would
suggest or recommend?
I would say anything that keeps your GKI
as low as possible. If see what it does
to the person's GKI, if it if it raises,
don't don't do that.
>> So, in the NHS, it's really difficult to
measure the GKI unless you're academic
or at a research center.
>> No, they I think we have things keto
mojo available.
>> You know, everybody should have a a keto
mojo,
>> right? I've got one on my table if you
want to see what one looks like.
>> Yeah,
>> that's good to know.
>> And uh get the free Libra, right? The
the things you can wear on your arm. It
should be the easiest thing to do.
>> We would love to think that, but really
in practicality, it doesn't translate in
that I work in Southeast London where
it's quite a deprived area and a lot of
these things are not accessible, which
is why I'm here trying to understand
what is accessible to our patients and
that are, you know, aren't expensive and
that they can do dayto-day. So that's
why I'm here.
>> Yeah. Well, I think
I mean definitely um cancer patients
will benefit
from tailored curated supplementation
likely. The problem is the quality of
supplements are so so bad. So, you need
a lot of help navigating which ones are
safe to take that don't have fillers,
binders, a whole load of rubbish, quite
frankly, that has more rubbish stuff
than good stuff inside. So, you do need
to have someone who's really good at
navigating that for you to help you. Um,
a lot of biochemistry knowledge and that
sort of thing. And then yes with uh with
nutrition advice of course as I said the
most nutrition dense bioavailable
a lot of cancer patients you know going
through so much and if you are doing
treatment you have nausea you're not
well so I always say if you've got 20
mouthfuls of food to take in that you
can you can take in based on you know
you're tired you're not hungry you feel
nauseous any of these issues you need
every mouthful to count
so you don't want to be eating any foods
that's subtracting things that are
important for your body, fiber, seed
oils, they do do that. You know, you
don't want things that have no nutrition
that are going to fill you up, but
there's no nutrition inside of it. So,
it does really matter what you're
eating. Um, my team, we have Venusa
here. Um, inside of our team, the names
are inside of a publication. We have
quite a few of nutritionists and
biochemists that worked quite a lot.
Sorry, nutritions and and dietetics that
worked in our team and they studied
biochemistry. That's the difference.
They didn't follow the tradition sort of
standard nutrition education. They
actually studied hardcore biochemistry.
And I think that's really important in
any nutrition course and dietetics
course. They have to be strong in
biochemistry. So if you decide to go and
do a course, if you want to go into this
field, check out how good the
biochemistry teaching is.
>> Yeah. Well, you know, the other thing is
too is that, you know, if if you're
limiting the amount that you're eating,
the timing you're doing it um you know,
calorie restricted ketogenic diets or
you're doing periods of fasting and
refeeding, you'd also think about
nutrient density as well. uh from a
standpoint of organs, organs are
typically pretty cheap and if you're
eating less, you're going to get more
even more bioavailability with organs as
well. You can go too far, get
hypervitaminos, especially in the fat
soluble vitamins like a um if you overdo
it. But um that that's something that
people can typically do at a very and
you don't it's not it's not um you're
not worried about the you know what's
contained in the supplement form. It's a
it's a natural bioavailable form that's
not going to cause uh too much
disruption as long as you're taking in
appropriate amounts.
So, go to the side. Um, hi, my name is
Patrick Halford. I'm a nutritionist and
a pagan. And in case you don't know what
a pagan is, it's a pescatarian egg
eating vegan with pagan tendencies. Um
from from the the point of evolutionary
biology, I cannot really understand why
I as an adult would be breastfeeding
from another species of animal uh and
promoting all that IGF.
And I cannot see any logical basis by
which we became homo sapiens without
eating a very high marine food diet. So
my questions are actually two. One is on
methylation, homocyine, B vitamins, B12.
We know that folic acid could be a a bit
of a you know promoter of cancer cell
growth but methylation seems to be a
major issue in so many cancers and
certainly blood cancers and the other is
ascorbic acid. Um not just from the
treatment you know with intravenous etc
etc but all animals make ascorbic acid
and uh you know with the exception of
primates guinea pig fruit eating bats
etc. And it was Linus Pauling's sort of
notice that animals that make vitamin C
don't tend to get cancers and we do.
It's a very interesting you know 1970s
work on so it's a kind of evolutionary
biology question but also nutritional
question methylation homocyine B
vitamins and also vitamin C in the role
of cancer.
I think I think that diet you're eating
might have uh befuddled us all.
>> Um well, I mean, you know, as I said,
you know, testing your glucose and
ketones will help you refine what works
best for you in terms of your tolerances
and things. And you're right about the
vitamin C. You know, animals that
produce their own vitamin C um tend to
be quite resistant against cancer. And
that's why I do warn about reading
studies with my studies because they
make their own vitamin C. So that's a
factor. So if we're doing my studies and
we're trying to look at how they, you
know, that could reflect back to humans,
maybe we need to, you know, horribly
knock out their vitamin C production in
that respect to improve those models.
>> I would say that
>> could you answer your own question?
>> Well, I mean, as far as I can see, and I
mean leukemia is is absolute classic.
You know you just look at the literature
and there's so much evidence for raised
homocyine in numerous cancers. So uh my
view is that is extremely unhealthy. So
I would always want to check homocyine
and I find it very very high. A very
simple model there is you know an older
person might be B12 deficient as a
function of probably poor acid
production. Very simple. They could be
doing everything right. Um you know I
have um I don't have cancer patients.
I'm in between it, but I work with
people who have, you know, really good
HB1C, no insulin resistance, you know,
eating loads of fruit and veg and then
we find super raised homocyine and it
turns out to be just a function of B12
probably malabsorption and
>> well that low B that that loads of fruit
and veg is what's causing the
hypocchlory and the inability to absorb
B12.
>> I'm
I well Yeah. Yeah. But I I'm a little
bit a little bit dubious about that. But
um the point is the point is you know if
the literature is full of homocyine
associations all I would wish is that it
was something that would be checked and
then the other area which I do
understand because you know Tom and I
have had various discussions and I you
know GKI get it down below too. uh but
once you know cells are starved you know
you mentioned you know hyperbaric oxygen
therapy
uh if there were more time I would ask
what others are in your list personally
I like the idea of introvenous vitamin C
I mean you know we're searching for
chemotherapy agents that don't harm
healthy cells a bit like you know
ketotherapy and it looks like um IV
vitamin C as a follow-on thing is highly
um anti-cancer but has no negative
effects on healthy cells.
>> Yeah, I really agree with that. High
dose there's there's there's a lot of
they've actually published human trials
on that in various cancers where they've
done high dose the dosages being sort of
equivalent to one gram per kilogram of
body weight and the repetitions of
either twice to three times a week. And
uh the reasons for that are really
interesting but at the point of high
dose it's not an antioxidant. it's
actually working as a prooxidant on the
cancer cells and it increases the
hydrogen peroxide concentration around
the cancer cells and you know if you're
in therapeutic ketosis they're they're
less resistant to that and so there's
there's actually great trial
publications on that
>> thank you go to this side as well
>> um can you tell us more about the the
way to enhance the the mitochondrias
uh you talked about the the the the
fasting. What about sun uh sun exposure,
um red light therapy, melatonin, uh
cold, hot, high intensity?
>> Anybody know alternative ways of
improving mitochondrial function?
>> Look, there's a lot of stuff out there,
you know, not just red light therapy.
There's a lot these things can improve
mitochondria function transiently and in
a certain way. But I guess what I see is
we there's a lot of detailed thinking
here in a lot of the questions and it's
coming from a reliance on um I guess
trying to trying to find out what works.
Um, but the the great thing about
fasting and the you know ketogenic
metabolic therapy is it's an umbrella
term for so many different things
happening. And I think um I'm not you
know you could look at red light therapy
and and other approaches and throwing in
parasitic drugs and glutamine inhibitors
and stuff that should all be tested in
proper clinical trials. But until we do
that it's all speculation. So I have no
idea if that's going to help much.
Sunlight obviously is a good thing. If I
did a clinical trial in gabblastoma and
gave this group a lot of sunlight and
this not would that cure them? Not a
chance in hell. So, we have to think
about um you know, I mean, I'd do the
trial before I should I shouldn't say
that without doing the trial, but you
know, if I'm if I'm doing red light
therapy, this is a this is a terrible
terrible tumor and it I just I just
can't see like the treatment has to be
really powerful and well thought out in
in proper clinical trials. And honestly,
um,
the more I think I know, the more I do
the work, the more I realize I'm so
biased and I don't know that much and I
have to stay humble. So, I'm not going
to answer your question about red light,
but I'm I'm going to say I'm very
skeptical that it would be a great
gamecher and same with a lot of
supplements and things like that in
glyobblastoma. Does that make sense? So
I I'm it's a very harsh answer but I I
really think we have to focus on big
picture thinking and fasting keto diet
ketogenic metabolic therapy really is to
my mind the main game changer in these
things and all the other stuff needs
clinical trials but it's I just can't
see it being a big gamecher.
>> Well at least it won't harm.
>> Yeah.
>> No but help in what way? I mean, when
you speak to someone with a global, they
don't want to just get an extra month or
two. The I do have this neuroncology
meeting with the oncologist every damn
week, and they all sit there and try and
figure out like, oh, you know, if we
give a bit of extra radiation therapy or
a bit of extra chemo, and they're trying
to get an extra, you know, two or three
months or something. And that's a big
win for them, but they're just stuck in
this this house where their options are
limited. They got no windows. They can't
see outside of it. It's the same thing.
Maybe it will help, but they don't.
Global stomach patient wants a permanent
something long-term and improving
improve quality of life. So again, maybe
it'll help a little bit. I can't see it
helping a lot. And um I'm all for it.
I'm not against it, but I'm so neutral
on most of these other things. You know,
I I I think you you got to really get at
the heart of the condition and and u and
try to apply something that's going to
make a real powerful and effective
long-term change.
>> So So what sorry for what I understand
you you consider that fasting is above I
mean like uh uh yes fasting above in
term of stimulating uh the the mito.
>> Keep in mind I I could be wrong.
However, fa fasting is going to induce
that mito shift directly and it's going
to induce mito recovery more powerfully
than anything. The keto diet will do
both to a slower and more gradual
extent. Sleep is very powerful for mito
recovery. Very powerful.
Induces the mitoshift a little bit.
Okay, not much. Exercise it will induce
the msh shift a lot. Uh
>> and it's also very powerful but you can
take it too far. So you have to I think
the the future of this is um
if we're going to be relying on standard
treatments uh layering in each of these
approaches so particularly fasting keto
diet sleep exercise protocols in a very
intelligent manner that maximizes
mitoshift and mito recovery till the
cancer's gone and then you work on the
standard mitoic therapies. That would be
my take. Now, sunlight's part of that.
Cold exposure, heat exposure, that can
all help. Maybe red light therapy, all
that can help. Sure. But the main game
has to be those things that are doing
the most good.
>> Melatonin.
>> Medicine.
>> Melatonin. Sure. Yeah, maybe. But I want
to see clinical trials. I'm
evidence-based. I'm skeptical. I I see
patients, they ask me about a like part
not just GBM, Parkinson's, Alzheimer's,
all kinds of things. They ask me about
20 different things. And I'm like, you
can try all that stuff. and then they
come back and they're worse in a year.
It's okay. I don't mind if you try it,
but I don't want to give false hope.
This stuff's not going to work unless I
have the clinical trials showing it. And
that's why I focus on the clinical
trials so hard, which are really hard to
do
>> if you don't work on those. We'll never
advance the therapy. We'll never get it.
We'll never get this ahead without
proper clinical trials showing this
stuff. And so, we can try all this other
stuff and and you'll know someone
somewhere where it worked or it seemed
to work, right? So, so that's why I'm
say you have to focus on on getting good
science out there and good evidence. And
until then, I'm I'm all I can say to
your question is at the end of the day,
I don't know.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. Go ahead.
>> The
I I have to address those same types of
questions in the our pre-clinical
systems. Oh, people say, "Try this. Can
will it work? Will it work? You give me
$85,000 and I'll try it.
Okay. And then I'll give you the
evidence. And if it has a if it has a
therapeutic benefit and it's
statistically we have all the right
control groups, then the clinicians go
and say maybe we can modify it. But it
takes a lot of time and energy. These
are not cheap experiments to run
pre-clinical studies anymore than it is
to do a a clinical study. These are very
expensive studies. If I may, professor,
you of all people are
the right person to ask for that. I mean
on in a crowdfunding movement I'm sure
that there's money. Are
>> you kidding me?
>> They don't crowdfund. How much money do
you think you get from crowdfunding?
Doesn't help me. I I I I get it. Well
well we get it from private foundations
predominantly not people. So uh yeah
they what 10 15 bucks you to run these
kinds of trials you got to have
significant money. Philanthropy is the
big thing. But are we going to take so
much of our energy uh for a a study that
may have minimal impact? That's the key.
Just like uh Matthew said, we want
things that are going to be powerful.
I'm not saying red light's not going to
work, but I don't think it is. I would
say let's focus on something else.
>> I think the question is, you know, is
red light going to work by itself or is
melatonin going to work by itself? So, I
think what we're really saying is the
big hitter is bringing down the glucose,
raising the ketones, bringing down the
insulin. That's the big hitter. You
don't want to be focusing on the 5 10%
effects. You want to be focusing on the
90%. Um, that's that needs to be, you
know, the public message to drive this
forward.
But it doesn't mean don't
self-experiment especially with things
that are known to be quite safe because
you are your own experimentter and your
own advocate. The reason why we've
arrived now with more people accepting
of ketogenic metabolic therapy is of
patients actually experimenting on
themselves. You know there wasn't
unfortunately the clinical trial and so
you know patients have to drive that.
There was a study for infrared light
therapy 15 minutes of exposure pre-
given a glucose tolerance test and on
the participants I don't remember all
the details but what I do remember was
the postrandial glucose exposure was
reduced by 27%.
So that's really interesting and it's
not harmful to do it. So, you know, be
your own experimentter, right? Be your
own scientist. With regards to
melatonin,
melatonin protects cardiolipin,
right? We know cardipin is super super
important. The less cardipin you have,
well, cancer cells have less cardipin,
the less efficient your mitochondria
are. So something that's protecting your
mitochondria,
but again, there's so much rubbish
formulations out there. That's a real
problem. You know, with regards to
sunlight, you know, it's good for you.
We've been told so often, don't go out
in the sun, lather up on sunscreen. You
know, we make melanin for a reason, not
as a natural sunblock. We absorb
melanin. It's a DNA repair molecule.
It's an antioxidant. You know, Anthony
and I were talking the other day and he
was saying there are melanocytes in
inside of your brain. You know, well, if
it's only for your skin, why what are
they doing inside of your brain? Right?
When you don't wear sunglasses or blue
light blocking prescription glasses, the
the high noon sun, the UV light actually
sends a signal via your retinol cells
that signals to your melanocytes to make
melanin that you can absorb. And there
are actually trials going on right now
um with melanin analoges,
you know, produced by pharmaceutical
companies. Um, so they tell us not to go
in the sun, not to make any melanin. And
here's the other one that we can make
that we can sell you. Um,
and they've been showing to be really,
really good to treat cancers without
harming your healthy cells. We've got
the sun and let's not block it.
All right, so we've got just under 10
minutes, so we're going to try to do
rapid fire. So, please ask your question
as quickly as possible and and we'll try
to give a quick response and then we'll
try to get through a few more of these.
>> Heather Rosa, dean of the Institute for
Optimum Nutrition providing training in
the third profession in the UK that
deals with personalized nutrition,
nutritional therapists. My question is
predominantly to Matt. We're seeing the
rise of fasting mimicking diets and I
wondered if you would comment on their
potential efficacy.
Yeah, that's a lot of Walter Longo's
work. Uh, look, um, he's got the papers
out there. There seems to be some
efficacy, certainly in animal models.
Um, again, it's kind of like you can do
fasting many ways, and the fasting
mimicking diet is is one way to do it.
And I think, uh, theoretically that
seems to make sense to me and can work.
I prefer the real deal, but I'm not
going to say that's the only way. So
yeah, if fasting mimicking diet um is
doable by a person in the long term, I
would say go for it because the the data
look from what I've seen looks
encouraging so far.
>> Thank you.
>> Well, the fasting the fasting mimicking
diet was originally produced by Wilder
from the Mayo Mayo Clinic. It was called
the ketogenic diet.
>> Hi, I'm Karen Benson. I'm a lifestyle GP
in London.
What about patients who've got genetic
causes of cancer like BA and other
genes? Are you looking at promoting this
way of eating and living to them or
those studies been done yet?
>> Yeah, they they have been and and we're
we're starting that. Uh we have a paper
that's going to be submitted soon. We
found that every one of the genetic risk
risks risk factors
uh that you inherit not acquire this is
inherited risk factors brack one leaf
ramen many retinol blasto NF1 neurop
fibromytos a whole slug of these genetic
risk factors um every one of them in one
way or another disrupts mitochondrial
function making those possibly
modifiable by this kind of approach we
just don't have the data yet, but there
is a couple of preclinical studies
showing that it can work, but not not in
humans yet. But I've had I've had
several people email me who have family
members that have these and they're
asking me and the answer is we we
haven't tried it yet on people. Uh but I
think it's coming.
>> Can I ask one more thing? What about
metformin? You haven't mentioned
metformin at all.
Um, yeah, I know it it we tried it one
time. Um, because it's a gl a glucose
lowering drug for people with diabetes,
but it doesn't bring your sugar down to
the levels that would be killing tumor
cells, but it may have other effects on
improves increasing oxidative stress.
But when we put we put our mice on
metformin and then calorie restricted
them and they got super sick from lactic
acidosis. So I don't know what was going
on with that. So I said, you know,
you're only trying to do things that
work, right? I But maybe it would work
under a different different context. I'm
not sure.
>> Okay, I'll say it again. Paro principle.
Have you heard of that? So in any
system, 20% of the inputs gives you 80%
of the outputs. So in that 20% for
cancer, my perspective, I could be
wrong. Fasting, keto diet, sleep, proper
exercise regimen, that's it. all the
other stuff, the metformin, the
repurpose drugs, the u uh
supplementations,
um red light therapy, I consider all
that stuff to be in the 80%, not
useless, but if you're going to if
you're going to make real change, you
want to find out the 20% that does 80%
of the goodness. Does that make sense?
So, it's so important to get perspective
here. I think a lot of these treatments
can help as supplements and and do a
little bit of good, but you want to make
a big change. I I really think those are
the things that we have to focus on.
>> Thank you.
>> Go to this side.
>> Hello, my name is L and my question is
mainly for Isabella regarding your
research. Um, was there an increase of
seed oil consumption in the suppression
of ketosis phase?
Um that's a really great question and
the answer was absolutely not. So our
participants were really aware already
of seed oils
and not wanting to consume them. So when
they introduced the carbohydrates in the
sec in the middle phase, the P2 phase to
suppress ketosis, they didn't actually
increase seed oil. So you know um there
was a some consumption of of olive oil
that was consistent throughout the whole
trial. We've got really really great um
data and recording on this. Um the
predominantly the the fats that were
used was butter, ghee, coconut oil,
things like that, animal fats, tallow,
duck fat, these sort of things. And that
didn't change through the trial. So, you
know, this really really shows you that
those negative changes that we saw in
those growth factors and inflammatory
markers that was due to consuming
carbohydrates, not seed oils, right? and
then took away the carbohydrate, they
reverted back to a healthier profile.
So, this shows you a lot. I will also
mention
with regards to type 1 diabetes,
it's the insulin, which is the
carbohydrates that enables them to gain
weight. That's something that should be
really pointing out the driving of
weight gain. Insulin is required. Now,
can seed oils trigger insulin receptors?
it can trigger some you know some seed
oils absolutely can so you have to be
really aware of that hence why I mention
about having less seed oils and plant
plants but um in terms of weight the
weight gain argument type 1 diabetics
need insulin and if you're not type 1
diabetic how do you trigger the insulin
carbohydrates
>> all right so the last question will be
to Dr. Westman,
>> Eric Westman, Duke University, North
Carolina. I remember a lecture from an
NIH professor who had a primate colony.
They watched them till they aged and one
of them got fewer calories than the
other. Two different groups. and the
underfed the calorierest restricted
primate colony had less heart disease
less cancer
so we're talking about the same process
in it perhaps and when he was asked why
does this happen he waved his arms up
there this is an NIH prof you know
esteemed he said we don't know maybe
entropy
everyone laughed
No, he may have been right.
>> And that is just overuse. Entropy. It's
not the age, it's the miles, that sort
of thing. And then the other thing I I
didn't hear any word of seed oils and
the GKI. Do you do you care about the
seed oils with the GKI?
This is borrowing on yesterday's
controversy.
>> Yeah. Right.
I'm not going to go down the seed oil
path. All right. But I want to talk.
>> Well, it's not part of the GKI.
>> Well,
I think Eric the key thing here is
entropy
second law of thermodynamics
>> is it not
>> it is and and and ketones
uh delay entropy they make because
ultimately we die from reaching equ our
mitochondria can no longer maintain
energy balance and we die now unless
they get run over a shot or something
like this is different but in for aging
uh we need to maintain the electrical
grid gradient across membranes, which is
energydriven. And if you can do that at
a highly more efficient way, you're
going to delay entropy, but never
completely, but you're going to delay
it. That's that's what we're looking at
with the bioenergetic potential of a
ketone body, which Bud Vich was the one
to to to do that, and I put that out in
several of our patri dealing with that.
So I I I think the entropy issue is a
central issue to what we're doing here
for overall aging which is another
aspect of the what we're what we're
talking about. Um but I think um uh
getting into the bioenergetics of that
which we we are working on but it's it's
it's quite detailed but but the issue is
very important extremely important. So
in a metabolic program, I see people
eating less and less. And if we had an
iPhone or Android, I don't know, that
could go a month without a battery
recharge, this would be a huge thing,
right? Do we have this wrong? Should we
see how little we can consume as humans
and survive instead of seeing how much
we can eat? And my patients come in and
saying, "Well, but I want this. I want
maybe we need to have a different idea."
the fasting I get so much push back. Oh,
you can't fast these people for more
than a, you know, but so maybe the other
way to flip it around is eat optimal
nutrition and don't eat too much.
>> Yeah. Well, that's
>> that's so simple.
>> That's the key.
>> Oh, but who wants to People don't want
to do that.
>> Well, I do.
>> We got the great unwashed. I mean, you
go to a football game, what are you
going to do? I mean, you're gonna eat a
big dog hot dog and all this stuff, but
but you're but you're right. You're
absolutely right about that. But it's
human nature. We are t tempted every
day. We walk around. You know, how much
discipline can you handle walking
through? Where did we go the other day?
What was the name of that market we went
through?
>> Yeah, that mark whatever that was. I
mean, you were drawn into every massive
hamburger and whatever it is, you know.
Oh, yeah. Well, today I'm going to eat a
piece of lettuce, you know. Give me a
break, you know.
It's human nature. But you're but you
are correct.
>> Um coming back to when you just
mentioned the seed oil aspect because
you know seed oils rarely are people
having seed oils freshly pressed, cold
pressed, not exposed to the sun, all
that sort of stuff. It's usually cooked
with foods that we shouldn't be eating
either because it's palatability. and
and a lot of seed oils obviously have an
increase in um four hydroxyonol and uh I
think it's 16 hode and these types of uh
lipids actually harm your mitochondria a
lot so you have to always think about
are they harming my mitochondria it's
only research on that um so that just to
think that how much should you consume
of that you know and then as I said
earlier on I think about seed oils the
fact that they do prevent bile
reabsorption
So at its most basic level, it's going
to cause nutrient deficiency by
preventing you absorbing those fats
soluble vitamins and torine and omega6
and omega-3. So I'm not, you know, in
favor of seed oils for that.
Additionally to the fact that seed oils
quite often are really rich in
phytoestrogens
and also a number of them are actually
rich in um lectins that can actually
also stimulate certain insulin receptors
not glucose uptake receptors but um the
actual PI3K map kynise which is the
growth and division pathways. I caveat
all of that on the top of the fact that
usually they are eaten with
carbohydrates. So now you've got a
double whammy. Um, and in terms of the
fasting aspect, when you go to a very
nutrient-dense bioavailable diet, the
fasting gets easy. You're just not
hungry,
>> you know. So, the control doesn't need
to be there as much actually. And when
you're facing cancer, you you do the
right diet, you're not hungry, and
you're motivated.
So,
>> all right. Well, um, unfortunately we
can't get to all the
>> just just the last question. Very quick
one and it's it's a
>> I think they got it. Yeah. Yeah. But we
but everyone will be available uh after
the fact. So very sorry about that.
Thank you all very much for that and
thank you for the panel.